Generally, the term “gestalt” refers to something that is greater than its parts. 

I’d like to repurpose the term in this context to refer to the way in which qualia pool together to form awareness. 

As I said, I don’t believe there is a spotlight. I believe, based on my own internal observations, that each quale illuminates itself, and can perhaps illuminate others. This is because the nature of “experience” entails attention. To focus on something is just to experience it more potently.

Now, at any moment, there is a pool of protoqualia and metaqualia swimming in and out of your mind. Protoqualia are spawned directly due to the sense organs in your body, while metaqualia are continuously generated both as reactions to these protoqualia and as reactions to other metaqualia. So, when we think of our “spotlight”, what we’re really ascertaining is that, whenever we focus on a specific facet of our reality, what’s happening is that all of the qualia in the pool are directing their “light” towards one another. A focused flow state can be imagined as a circle of qualia all pointing their “light” towards a single quale. Meanwhile, a highly viscous flow state can be imagined as a disorganized pool of qualia pointing at various targets. 

It is this collective illumination that simulates our spotlight. That’s why I care about the term, gestalt. At any moment, you are shifting your focus to and from different protoqualia and metaqualia, but “you” are actually just the gestalt that emerges from these protoqualia and metaqualia illuminating each other. 

Crucially, this “illumination” actually plays some role in the generation of metaqualia. Try it out right now. Focus on something random in your room. You’ll soon find your mind sprouting thoughts about that thing. For me, I looked at a remote. My mind for some reason thought about all the germs from touching it, as well as some other fleeting thoughts. So, if you have a similar experience, then you can verify this assertion: flow generates metaqualia. 

This is actually potentially useful to you in terms of daily life. Personally, it helped me learn how to deal with intrusive thoughts. Specifically because I learned that my mind generates thoughts that are similar to those that I pay a lot of attention to. So, if I stop paying a lot of attention to scary thoughts like “what if I broke this thing”, then I will stop having that thought as often. It may be common sense, but it’s actually quite helpful with respect to mental health at large. Because you can’t control what thoughts appear, but you can start to influence the system that generates them by curating better thoughts. That’s what I call “curation”. 

The metaphor I use for curation is that we’re like a curator in an art museum, but the staff don’t speak the same language. So, we can’t tell them to take down certain paintings, or which kind of paintings we want them to put up, but we notice that when we stare at certain paintings for a while, the staff will pick up on that and find more paintings like that one. Similarly, if they notice we never stare at certain paintings, they’ll take those down and avoid putting up paintings like them.

This is how you make choices. This is literally the crux of your free-will, and therefore, your identity. 

You are the gestalt generated by this pool of qualia flowing together. 

Let’s recap our building blocks now: Qualia, valence, protoqualia, metaqualia, flow, viscosity, gestalt and curation.

There’s one issue with this model though. Qualia are not discrete. We can talk about a “quale” in the same way that we can talk about a drop of water, as opposed to apples and oranges. You cannot *just* have a red experience. You are viewing splotches of reds mixed with other colors, at varying shades, in varying locations, and contrasted by everything else in your other sensory channels like what song you’re listening to our what your room smells like. So then, how does this awareness work if it’s distributed across a continuous mixture of experiences?

This is a question that I think we’ll only be able to answer with more inquiry. We need to train our minds towards this way of thinking. We need more terms. It’s a mind bending concept, this non-spatial pool of qualia mixing together, undulating in waves of flow, and reproducing even more qualia as the old qualia seems to evaporate somehow. It’s at this point that I ask myself: how valid are these assertions I’m even making?